

Wikipedia The Free Encyclopedia

    Donate
    Create account
    Log in

Contents
(Top)
Background

Erection of the inner German border

Start of the construction (1961)

Structure and adjacent areas

Official crossings and usage

Concerts by Western artists and growing anti-Wall sentiment

Comments by politicians

Fall

Legacy

Related media

See also

Notes

References

    External links

Berlin Wall

    Article
    Talk

    Read
    View source
    View history

Tools

Appearance
Text

    Small
    Standard
    Large

Width

    Standard
    Wide

Color (beta)

    Automatic
    Light
    Dark

Coordinates: 52°30′16″N 13°26′28″E
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Sorry to interrupt, but we're short on time to hit our goal.
This Friday, we ask you to join the 2% of readers who give. If everyone reading this right now gave just $2.75, we'd hit our goal quickly. $2.75 is all we ask.
December 19: Wikipedia still can't be sold
We're sorry we've made several attempts to reach you lately, but it's Friday, December 19, and we still need some help. If everyone reading this gave $2.75 today, we'd hit our goal in a few hours. Most readers don't donate; only 2% do. Wikipedia is run by a nonprofit, not by a billionaire. So if Wikipedia has given you $2.75 worth of knowledge, please give. Any contribution helps, whether it's $2.75 or $25.
This article is about the wall that surrounded West Berlin during the Cold War. For the border that divided most of East and West Germany, see Inner German border. For the video game, see The Berlin Wall (video game). For the ring wall around the historic city of Berlin, see Berlin Customs Wall.
Berlin Wall
From the West Berlin side, Berlin Wall graffiti art in 1986. The wall "death strip", on the east side of the Wall, here follows the curve of the Luisenstadt Canal (filled in 1932).
The Wall and its checkpoints
General information
Type	Wall
Location	

    East Germany
    East Berlin; see History of Berlin for further info

Coordinates	52°30′16″N 13°26′28″E
Construction started	13 August 1961
Demolished	9 November 1989 – 1994; 31 years ago[1]
Dimensions
Other dimensions	

    Border length around West Berlin: 155 km (96 mi)
    Border length between West Berlin and East Germany: 111.9 km (69.5 mi)
    Border length between West and East Berlin: 43.1 km (26.8 mi)
    Border length through residential areas in East Berlin: 37 km (23 mi)
    Concrete segment of wall height: 3.6 m (11.8 ft)
    Concrete segment of wall length: 106 km (66 mi)
    Wire mesh fencing: 66.5 km (41.3 mi)
    Anti-vehicle trenches length: 105.5 km (65.6 mi)
    Contact/signal fence length: 127.5 km (79.2 mi)
    Column track width: 7 m (7.7 yd)
    Column track length: 124.3 km (77.2 mi)
    Number of watch towers: 302
    Number of bunkers: 20

Technical details
Size	155 km (96.3 mi)
	
This article is part of
a series about
Walter Ulbricht

    SED Elections
        1950 1954 1958 1963 1967 1971

Early political career

Government and policies

Legacy

Family

    vte

Eastern Bloc
Republics of the USSR

Allied and satellite states

Related organizations

Opposition

Cold War events

Fall

    vte

Satellite image of Berlin, with the wall location marked in yellow
West and East Berlin borders overlaying a modern road map

The Berlin Wall (German: Berliner Mauer, pronounced [bɛʁˌliːnɐ ˈmaʊɐ] ⓘ), officially the Anti-Fascist Protection Rampart, was a guarded concrete barrier that encircled West Berlin from 1961 to 1989, separating it from East Berlin and the German Democratic Republic (GDR; East Germany).[a][1][3] Construction of the Berlin Wall was commenced by the government of the GDR on 13 August 1961. It included guard towers placed along large concrete walls,[4] accompanied by a wide area (later known as the "death strip") that contained anti-vehicle trenches, beds of nails and other defenses. The primary intention for the Wall's construction was to prevent East German citizens from fleeing to the West.[5]

The Soviet Bloc propaganda portrayed the Wall as protecting its population from "fascist elements conspiring to prevent the will of the people" from building a communist state in the GDR. The authorities officially referred to the Berlin Wall as the Anti-Fascist Protection Rampart (German: Antifaschistischer Schutzwall, pronounced [antifaˌʃɪstɪʃɐ ˈʃʊtsval] ⓘ). Conversely, West Berlin's city government sometimes referred to it as the "Wall of Shame", a term coined by mayor Willy Brandt in reference to the Wall's restriction on freedom of movement.[6] Along with the separate and much longer inner German border, which demarcated the border between East and West Germany, it came to symbolize physically the Iron Curtain that separated the Western Bloc and Soviet satellite states of the Eastern Bloc during the Cold War.[7]

Before the Wall's erection, 3.5 million East Germans (20% of the population[8]) circumvented Eastern Bloc emigration restrictions and defected from the GDR, many by crossing over the border from East Berlin into West Berlin; from there they could then travel to West Germany and to other Western European countries. After 1961, the deadly force associated with the Wall prevented almost all such emigration.[9] During this period, over 100,000[10] people attempted to escape, and over 5,000 people succeeded in escaping over the Wall, with an estimated death toll of those killed by East German authorities ranging from 136[11] to more than 200[7][12] in and around Berlin.

In 1989, a series of revolutions in nearby Eastern Bloc countries (Poland and Hungary in particular) and the events of the "Pan-European Picnic" set in motion a peaceful development during which the Iron Curtain largely broke; rulers in the East came under public pressure to cease their repressive policies.[13][14][15] After several weeks of civil unrest, the East German government announced on 9 November 1989 that all GDR citizens could visit the FRG and West Berlin. Crowds of East Germans crossed and climbed onto the Wall, joined by West Germans on the other side, and souvenir hunters chipped away parts of the Wall over the next few weeks.[7] The Brandenburg Gate section, a few meters from the Berlin Wall, reopened on 22 December 1989, with full demolition of the Wall beginning on 13 June 1990 and concluding in 1994.[1] The fall of the Berlin Wall paved the way for German reunification, which formally took place on 3 October 1990.[7]
Background
Post-war Germany
The occupied sectors of Berlin

After the end of World War II in Europe, what remained of pre-war Germany west of the Oder-Neisse line was divided into four occupation zones (as per the Potsdam Agreement), each one controlled by one of the four occupying Allied powers: the United States, the United Kingdom, France and the Soviet Union. The capital, Berlin, as the seat of the Allied Control Council, was similarly subdivided into four sectors despite the city's location, which was fully within the Soviet zone.[16]

Within two years, political divisions increased between the Soviets and the other occupying powers. These included the Soviets' refusal to agree to reconstruction plans making post-war Germany self-sufficient, and to a detailed accounting of industrial plants, goods and infrastructure—some of which had already been removed by the Soviets.[17] France, the United Kingdom, the United States, and the Benelux countries later met to combine the non-Soviet zones of Germany into one zone for reconstruction, and to approve the extension of the Marshall Plan.[7]
Eastern Bloc and the Berlin airlift
Further information: Eastern Bloc and Berlin Blockade
Duration: 42 seconds.0:42
Brandenburg Gate in 1945, after the end of World War II

Following the defeat of Nazi Germany in World War II, the Soviet Union engineered the installation of communist regimes in most of the countries occupied by Soviet military forces at the end of the war, including Poland, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, Romania, and the GDR, which together with Albania formed the Comecon in 1949 and later a military alliance, the Warsaw Pact. The beginning of the Cold War saw the Eastern Bloc of the Soviet Union confront the Western Bloc of the United States, with the latter grouping becoming largely united in 1949 under NATO and the former grouping becoming largely united in 1955 under the Warsaw Pact.[18][19] As the Soviet Union already had an armed presence and political domination all over its eastern satellite states by 1955, the pact has been long considered "superfluous",[20] and because of the rushed way in which it was conceived, NATO officials labeled it a "cardboard castle".[21] There was no direct military confrontation between the two organizations; instead, the conflict was fought on an ideological basis and through proxy wars. Both NATO and the Warsaw Pact led to the expansion of military forces and their integration into the respective blocs.[19] The Warsaw Pact's largest military engagement was the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia, its own member state, in August 1968.[19]

Since the end of the war, the USSR installed a Soviet-style regime in the Soviet occupation zone of Germany and later founded the GDR, with the country's political system based on a centrally planned socialist economic model with nationalized means of production, and with repressive secret police institutions, under party dictatorship of the SED (Sozialistische Einheitspartei Deutschlands; Socialist Unity Party of Germany) similar to the party dictatorship of the Soviet Communist Party in the USSR.[22]

At the same time, a parallel country was established under the control of the Western powers in the zones of post-war Germany occupied by them, culminating in the foundation of the Federal Republic of Germany in 1949,[23] which initially claimed to be the sole legitimate power in all of Germany, East and West. The material standard of living in the Western zones of Berlin began to improve quickly, and residents of the Soviet zone soon began leaving for the West, fleeing hunger, poverty and repression in the Soviet Zone for a better life in the West. Soon residents of other parts of the Soviet zone began to escape to the West through Berlin, and this migration, called in Germany "Republikflucht", deprived the Soviet zone not only of workers needed for post-war reconstruction, but disproportionately of highly educated people, which came to be known as the "Brain Drain".

In 1948, in response to moves by the Western powers to establish a separate, federal system of government in the Western zones, and to extend the US Marshall Plan of economic assistance to Germany, the Soviets instituted the Berlin Blockade, preventing people, food, materials and supplies from arriving in West Berlin by land routes through the Soviet zone.[24] The United States, the United Kingdom, France, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and several other countries began a massive "airlift", supplying West Berlin with food and other supplies.[25] The Soviets mounted a public relations campaign against the Western policy change. Communists attempted to disrupt the elections of 1948, preceding large losses therein,[26] while 300,000 Berliners demonstrated for the international airlift to continue.[27] In May 1949, Stalin lifted the blockade, permitting the resumption of Western shipments to Berlin.[28][29]

The German Democratic Republic (the "GDR"; East Germany) was declared on 7 October 1949. On that day, the USSR ended the Soviet military government which had governed the Soviet Occupation Zone (Sowetische Besatzungszone) since the end of the war and handed over legal power[30][page needed] to the Provisorische Volkskammer under the new Constitution of the GDR which came into force that day. However, until 1955, the Soviets maintained considerable legal control over the GDR state, including the regional governments, through the Sowetische Kontrollkommission and maintained a presence in various East German administrative, military, and secret police structures.[31][32] Even after legal sovereignty of the GDR was restored in 1955, the Soviet Union continued to maintain considerable influence over administration and lawmaking in the GDR through the Soviet embassy and through the implicit threat of force which could be exercised through the continuing large Soviet military presence in the GDR, which was used to repress protests in East Germany bloodily in June 1953.[33]

East Germany differed from West Germany (Federal Republic of Germany), which developed into a Western capitalist country with a social market economy and a democratic parliamentary government. Continual economic growth starting in the 1950s fueled a 20-year "economic miracle" ("Wirtschaftswunder"). As West Germany's economy grew, and its standard of living steadily improved, many East Germans wanted to move to West Germany.[34]
Emigration westward in the early 1950s
Main articles: Eastern Bloc emigration and defection and Eastern Bloc

After the Soviet occupation of Eastern Europe at the end of World War II, the majority of those living in the newly acquired areas of the Eastern Bloc aspired to independence and wanted the Soviets to leave.[35] Taking advantage of the zonal border between occupied zones in Germany, the number of GDR citizens moving to West Germany totaled 187,000 in 1950; 165,000 in 1951; 182,000 in 1952; and 331,000 in 1953.[36][37] One reason for the sharp 1953 increase was fear of potential further Sovietization, given the increasingly paranoid actions of Joseph Stalin in late 1952 and early 1953.[38] In the first six months of 1953, 226,000 had fled.[39]
Erection of the inner German border
Further information: Inner German border and Emigration from the Eastern Bloc

By the early 1950s, the Soviet approach to controlling national movement, restricting emigration, was emulated by most of the rest of the Eastern Bloc, including East Germany.[40] The restrictions presented a quandary for some Eastern Bloc states, which had been more economically advanced and open than the Soviet Union, such that crossing borders seemed more natural—especially where no prior border existed between East and West Germany.[41]

Up until 1952, the demarcation lines between East Germany and the western occupied zones could be easily crossed in most places.[42] On 1 April 1952, East German leaders met the Soviet leader Joseph Stalin in Moscow; during the discussions, Stalin's foreign minister Vyacheslav Molotov proposed that the East Germans should "introduce a system of passes for visits of West Berlin residents to the territory of East Berlin [so as to stop] free movement of Western agents" in the GDR. Stalin agreed, calling the situation "intolerable". He advised the East Germans to build up their border defenses, telling them that "The demarcation line between East and West Germany should be considered a border—and not just any border, but a dangerous one ... The Germans will guard the line of defence with their lives."[43]

Consequently, the inner German border between the two German states was closed, and a barbed-wire fence erected. The border between the Western and Eastern sectors of Berlin, however, remained open, although traffic between the Soviet and the Western sectors was somewhat restricted. This resulted in Berlin becoming a magnet for East Germans desperate to escape life in the GDR, and also a flashpoint for tension between the United States and the Soviet Union.[7]

In 1955, the Soviets gave East Germany authority over civilian movement in Berlin, passing control to a regime not recognized in the West.[44] Initially, East Germany granted "visits" to allow its residents access to West Germany. However, following the defection of large numbers of East Germans (known as Republikflucht) under this regime, the new East German state legally restricted virtually all travel to the West in 1956.[42] Soviet East German ambassador Mikhail Pervukhin observed that "the presence in Berlin of an open and essentially uncontrolled border between the socialist and capitalist worlds unwittingly prompts the population to make a comparison between both parts of the city, which unfortunately does not always turn out in favour of Democratic [East] Berlin."[45]
Berlin emigration loophole

With the closing of the inner German border officially in 1952,[45] the border in Berlin remained considerably more accessible because it was administered by all four occupying powers.[42] Accordingly, Berlin became the main route by which East Germans left for the West.[46] On 11 December 1957, East Germany introduced a new passport law that reduced the overall number of refugees leaving Eastern Germany.[7]

It had the unintended result of drastically increasing the percentage of those leaving through West Berlin from 60% to well over 90% by the end of 1958.[45] Those caught trying to leave East Berlin were subjected to heavy penalties, but with no physical barrier and subway train access still available to West Berlin, such measures were ineffective.[47] The Berlin sector border was essentially a "loophole" through which Eastern Bloc citizens could still escape.[45] The 3.5 million East Germans who had left by 1961 totalled approximately 20% of the entire East German population.[47]

An important reason that passage between East Germany and West Berlin was not stopped earlier was that doing so would cut off much of the railway traffic in East Germany. Construction of a new railway bypassing West Berlin, the Berlin outer ring, commenced in 1951. Following the completion of the railway in 1961, closing the border became a more practical proposition.[48]
Brain drain

The emigrants tended to be young and well-educated, leading to the "brain drain" feared by officials in East Germany.[35] Yuri Andropov, then the CPSU Director on Relations with Communist and Workers' Parties of Socialist Countries, wrote an urgent letter on 28 August 1958 to the Central Committee about the significant 50% increase in the number of East German intelligentsia among the refugees.[49] Andropov reported that, while the East German leadership stated that they were leaving for economic reasons, testimony from refugees indicated that the reasons were more political than material.[49] He stated "the flight of the intelligentsia has reached a particularly critical phase."[49]

By 1960, the combination of World War II and the massive emigration westward left East Germany with only 61% of its population of working age, compared to 70.5% before the war. The loss was disproportionately heavy among professionals: engineers, technicians, physicians, teachers, lawyers, and skilled workers. The direct cost of manpower losses to East Germany (and corresponding gain to the West) has been estimated at $7 billion to $9 billion, with East German party leader Walter Ulbricht later claiming that West Germany owed him $17 billion in compensation, including reparations as well as manpower losses.[47] In addition, the drain of East Germany's young population potentially cost it over 22.5 billion marks in lost educational investment.[50] The brain drain of professionals had become so damaging to the political credibility and economic viability of East Germany that the re-securing of the German communist frontier was imperative.[51]

The exodus of emigrants from East Germany presented two minor potential benefits: an easy way to smuggle East German secret agents to West Germany, and a reduction in the number of citizens hostile to the communist regime. Neither of these advantages, however, proved particularly useful.[52]

Start of the construction (1961)
Duration: 1 minute and 19 seconds.1:19
Aerial footage of the wall as filmed by the CIA in 1961
East German Combat Groups of the Working Class close the border on 13 August 1961 in preparation for the Berlin Wall construction
East German construction workers building the Berlin Wall, 20 November 1961
Animation showing how the Berlin Wall was constructed
Main article: Berlin Crisis of 1961

On 15 June 1961, First Secretary of the Socialist Unity Party and GDR State Council chairman Walter Ulbricht stated in an international press conference, "Niemand hat die Absicht, eine Mauer zu errichten!" (No one has the intention of erecting a wall!). It was the first time the colloquial term Mauer (wall) had been used in this context.[53]

The transcript of a telephone call between Nikita Khrushchev and Ulbricht, on 1 August in the same year, suggests that the initiative for the construction of the Wall came from Khrushchev.[54][55] However, other sources suggest that Khrushchev had initially been wary about building a wall, fearing negative Western reaction. Nevertheless, Ulbricht had pushed for a border closure for some time, arguing that East Germany's existence was at stake.[56][page needed]

Khrushchev had become emboldened upon seeing US president John F. Kennedy's youth and inexperience, which he considered a weakness. In the 1961 Vienna summit, Kennedy made the error of admitting that the US would not actively oppose the building of a barrier.[57] A feeling of miscalculation and failure immediately afterwards was admitted by Kennedy in a candid interview with New York Times columnist James "Scotty" Reston.[58] On Saturday, 12 August 1961, the leaders of the GDR attended a garden party at a government guesthouse in Döllnsee, in a wooded area to the north of East Berlin. There, Ulbricht signed the order to close the border and erect a wall.[7]

At midnight, the police and units of the East German army began to close the border and, by Sunday morning, 13 August, the border with West Berlin was closed. East German troops and workers had begun to tear up streets running alongside the border to make them impassable to most vehicles and to install barbed wire entanglements and fences along the 156 km (97 mi) around the three western sectors, and the 43 km (27 mi) that divided West and East Berlin.[59] The date of 13 August became commonly referred to as Barbed Wire Sunday in Germany.[7]

The barrier was built inside East Berlin on East German territory to ensure that it did not encroach on West Berlin at any point. Generally, the Wall was only slightly inside East Berlin, but in a few places it was some distance from the legal border, most notably at Potsdamer Bahnhof[60] and the Lenné Triangle[61] that is now much of the Potsdamer Platz development.

Later, the initial barrier was built up into the Wall proper, the first concrete elements and large blocks being put in place on 17 August. During the construction of the Wall, National People's Army (NVA) and Combat Groups of the Working Class (KdA) soldiers stood in front of it with orders to shoot anyone who attempted to defect. Additionally, chain fences, walls, minefields and other obstacles were installed along the length of East Germany's western border with West Germany proper. A wide no man's land was cleared as well to provide a better overview and a clear line of fire at fleeing refugees.[62]
Immediate effects

With the closing of the east–west sector boundary in Berlin, the vast majority of East Germans could no longer travel or emigrate to West Germany. Berlin soon went from being the easiest place to make an unauthorized crossing between East and West Germany to being the most difficult.[63] Many families were split, while East Berliners employed in the West were cut off from their jobs. West Berlin became an isolated exclave in a hostile land. West Berliners demonstrated against the Wall, led by their Mayor (Oberbürgermeister) Willy Brandt, who criticized the United States for failing to respond and went so far as to suggest to Washington what to do next. Kennedy was furious.[64] Allied intelligence agencies had hypothesized about a wall to stop the flood of refugees, but the main candidate for its location was around the perimeter of the city. In 1961, Secretary of State Dean Rusk proclaimed, "The Wall certainly ought not to be a permanent feature of the European landscape. I see no reason why the Soviet Union should think it is to their advantage in any way to leave there that monument to communist failure."[62]

United States and UK sources had expected the Soviet sector to be sealed off from West Berlin but were surprised by how long the East Germans took for such a move. They considered the Wall as an end to concerns about a GDR/Soviet retaking or capture of the whole of Berlin; the Wall would presumably have been an unnecessary project if such plans were afloat. Thus, they concluded that the possibility of a Soviet military conflict over Berlin had decreased.[65]

The East German government claimed that the Wall was an "anti-fascist protective rampart" (German: "antifaschistischer Schutzwall") intended to dissuade aggression from the West.[66] Another official justification was the activities of Western agents in Eastern Europe.[67] The Eastern German government also claimed that West Berliners were buying out state-subsidized goods in East Berlin. East Germans and others greeted such statements with skepticism, as most of the time, the border was only closed for citizens of East Germany traveling to the West, but not for residents of West Berlin travelling to the East.[68] The construction of the Wall had caused considerable hardship to families divided by it. Most people believed that the Wall was mainly a means of preventing the citizens of East Germany from entering or fleeing to West Berlin.[69]
Secondary response
Duration: 1 minute and 43 seconds.1:43Subtitles available.CC
Universal Newsreel of the 1st anniversary of the Berlin Wall
US President John F. Kennedy visiting the Berlin Wall on 26 June 1963

The National Security Agency was the only American intelligence agency that was aware that East Germany was to take action to deal with the brain drain problem. On 9 August 1961, the NSA intercepted an advance warning information of the Socialist Unity Party's plan to close the intra-Berlin border between East and West Berlin completely for foot traffic. The interagency intelligence Berlin Watch Committee assessed that this intercept "might be the first step in a plan to close the border."[70][71] This warning did not reach John F. Kennedy until noon on 13 August 1961, while he was vacationing in his yacht off the Kennedy Compound in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts. While Kennedy was angry that he had no advance warning, he was relieved that the East Germans and the Soviets had only divided Berlin without taking any action against West Berlin's access to the West. However, he denounced the Berlin Wall, whose erection worsened the relations between the United States and the Soviet Union.[70][71]

In response to the erection of the Berlin Wall, a retired general, Lucius D. Clay, was appointed by Kennedy as his special advisor with ambassadorial rank. Clay had been the Military Governor of the US Zone of Occupation in Germany during the period of the Berlin Blockade and had ordered the first measures in what became the Berlin Airlift. He was immensely popular with the residents of West Berlin, and his appointment was an unambiguous sign that Kennedy would not compromise on the status of West Berlin. As a symbolic gesture, Kennedy sent Clay and Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson to West Berlin. They landed at Tempelhof Airport on the afternoon of Saturday, 19 August 1961 and were greeted enthusiastically by the local population.[72][7]

They arrived in a city defended by three Allied brigades—one each from the UK (Berlin Infantry Brigade), the US (Berlin Brigade), and France (Forces Françaises à Berlin). On 16 August, Kennedy had given the order for them to be reinforced. Early on 19 August, the 1st Battle Group, 18th Infantry Regiment (commanded by Colonel Glover S. Johns Jr.) was alerted.[73]

On Sunday morning, U.S. troops marched from West Germany through East Germany, bound for West Berlin. Lead elements—arranged in a column of 491 vehicles and trailers carrying 1,500 men, divided into five march units—left the Helmstedt-Marienborn checkpoint at 06:34. At Marienborn, the Soviet checkpoint next to Helmstedt on the West German-East German border, US personnel were counted by guards. The column was 160 km (99 mi) long, and covered 177 km (110 mi) from Marienborn to Berlin in full battle gear. East German police watched from beside trees next to the autobahn all the way along.[7]

The front of the convoy arrived at the outskirts of Berlin just before noon, to be met by Clay and Johnson, before parading through the streets of Berlin in front of a large crowd. At 04:00 on 21 August, Lyndon Johnson left West Berlin in the hands of General Frederick O. Hartel and his brigade of 4,224 officers and men. "For the next three and a half years, American battalions would rotate into West Berlin, by autobahn, at three-month intervals to demonstrate Allied rights to the city".[74]

The creation of the Wall had important implications for both German states. By stemming the exodus of people from East Germany, the East German government was able to reassert its control over the country: despite discontent with the Wall, economic problems caused by dual currency and the black market were largely eliminated. The economy in the GDR began to grow. However, the Wall proved a public relations disaster for the communist bloc as a whole. Western powers portrayed it as a symbol of communist tyranny, particularly after East German border guards shot and killed would-be defectors. Such fatalities were later treated as acts of murder by the reunified Germany.[75]
Structure and adjacent areas
Layout and modifications
[76][77] Length (km) 	Description
156.4 	Bordering around West Berlin within 3.4 m and 4.2 m in height
111.9 	Concrete walls
44.5 	Metal mesh fence (along death strip)
112.7 	Cross attachment in Potsdam
43.7 	Cross attachment along the border of East and West Berlin
0.5 	Remains of house fronts, land mansion bricks[clarification needed]
58.95 	Wall-shaped front wall with a height of 3.40 m
68.42 	Expanded metal fence with a height of 2.90 m as a "front barrier"
161 	Light strip
113.85 	Limit signal and barrier fence (GSSZ)
127.5 	Contact and signal fence
124.3 	Border patrol
Actual number 	Descriptions
186 	Observation towers (302 in West-Berlin)[clarification needed]
31 	Implementing agencies
259 	Dog runs
20 	Bunkers
Structure of the Berlin Wall (left to right)

    Border
    Outer strip
    Concrete wall with rounded top
    Anti vehicle ditch
    "Death strip" sand bank
    Guard road
    Lighting
    Observation towers
    Spikes or tank traps
    Electrified fence with alarms
    Inner wall
    Restricted zone

The Berlin Wall was more than 140 kilometres (87 mi) long. In June 1962, a second, parallel fence, also known as a "hinterland" wall (inner wall),[78] was built some 100 m (110 yd) farther into East German territory. The houses contained between the wall and fences were razed and the inhabitants relocated, thus establishing what later became known as the death strip. The death strip was covered with raked sand or gravel, rendering footprints easy to notice, easing the detection of trespassers and also enabling officers to see which guards had neglected their task;[79] it offered no cover; and, most importantly, it offered clear fields of fire for the Wall guards.

Through the years, the Berlin Wall evolved through four versions:[80]

    Wire fence and concrete block wall (1961)
    Improved wire fence (1962–1965)
    Improved concrete wall (1965–1975)
    Grenzmauer 75 (Border Wall 75) (1975–1989)

The "fourth-generation Wall", known officially as "Stützwandelement UL 12.11" (retaining wall element UL 12.11), was the final and most sophisticated version of the Wall. Begun in 1975[81] and completed about 1980,[82] it was constructed from 45,000 separate sections of reinforced concrete, each 3.6 metres (12 ft) high and 1.2 m (3.9 ft) wide, and cost DDM16,155,000 or about US$3,638,000.[83] The concrete provisions added to this version of the Wall were done to prevent escapees from driving their cars through the barricades.[84] At strategic points, the Wall was constructed to a somewhat weaker standard, so that East German and Soviet armored vehicles could easily break through in the event of war.[84]
Smooth piping lined the top of the Wall, intended to make it more difficult to scale. The areas just outside the wall, including the sidewalk, are de jure East Berlin territory (1984).
This section of the Wall's "death strip" featured Czech hedgehogs, a guard tower and a cleared area, 1977.

The top of the wall was lined with a smooth pipe, intended to make it more difficult to scale. The Wall was reinforced by mesh fencing, signal fencing, anti-vehicle trenches, barbed wire, dogs on long lines, "beds of nails" (also known as "Stalin's Carpet") under balconies hanging over the "death strip", over 116 watchtowers,[85] and 20 bunkers with hundreds of guards. This version of the Wall is the one most commonly seen in photographs, and surviving fragments of the Wall in Berlin and elsewhere around the world are generally pieces of the fourth-generation Wall. The layout came to resemble the inner German border in most technical aspects, except that the Berlin Wall had no landmines nor spring-guns.[79] Maintenance was performed on the outside of the wall by personnel who accessed the area outside it either via ladders or via hidden doors within the wall.[86] These doors could not be opened by a single person, needing two separate keys in two separate keyholes to unlock.[87]

As was the case with the inner German border, an unfortified strip of Eastern territory was left outside the wall.[88] This outer strip was used by workers to paint over graffiti and perform other maintenance on the outside of the wall[88] Unlike the inner German border, however, the outer strip was usually no more than four meters wide, and, in photos from the era, the exact location of the actual border in many places appears not even to have been marked. Also in contrast with the inner German border, little interest was shown by East German law enforcement in keeping outsiders off the outer strip; sidewalks of West Berlin streets even ran inside it.[88]

Despite the East German government's general policy of benign neglect, vandals were known to have been pursued in the outer strip, and even arrested. In 1986, defector and political activist Wolfram Hasch and four other defectors were standing inside the outer strip defacing the wall when East German personnel emerged from one of the hidden doors to apprehend them. All but Hasch escaped back into the western sector. Hasch himself was arrested, dragged through the door into the death strip, and later convicted of illegally crossing the de jure border outside the wall.[89] Graffiti artist Thierry Noir has reported having often been pursued there by East German soldiers.[90] While some graffiti artists were chased off the outer strip, others, such as Keith Haring, were seemingly tolerated.[91]
Surrounding municipalities

Besides the sector-sector boundary within Berlin itself, the Wall also separated West Berlin from the present-day state of Brandenburg. The following present-day municipalities, listed in counter-clockwise direction, share a border with the former West Berlin:

    Oberhavel: Mühlenbecker Land (partially), Glienicke/Nordbahn, Hohen Neuendorf, Hennigsdorf
    Havelland: Schönwalde-Glien, Falkensee, Dallgow-Döberitz
    Potsdam (urban district)
    Potsdam-Mittelmark: Stahnsdorf, Kleinmachnow, Teltow
    Teltow-Fläming: Großbeeren, Blankenfelde-Mahlow
    Dahme-Spreewald: Schönefeld (partially)

Official crossings and usage
See also: Berlin border crossings
A You Are Leaving sign at a border of the American sector
Position and course of the Berlin Wall and its border control checkpoints (1989)

There were nine border crossings between East and West Berlin. These allowed visits by West Berliners, other West Germans, Western foreigners and Allied personnel into East Berlin, as well as visits by GDR citizens and citizens of other socialist countries into West Berlin, provided that they held the necessary permits. These crossings were restricted according to which nationality was allowed to use it (East Germans, West Germans, West Berliners, other countries). The best known was the vehicle and pedestrian checkpoint at the corner of Friedrichstraße and Zimmerstraße (Checkpoint Charlie), which was restricted to Allied personnel and foreigners.[92]

Several other border crossings existed between West Berlin and surrounding East Germany. These could be used for transit between West Germany and West Berlin, for visits by West Berliners into East Germany, for transit into countries neighbouring East Germany (Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Denmark), and for visits by East Germans into West Berlin carrying a permit. After the 1972 agreements, new crossings were opened to allow West Berlin waste to be transported into East German dumps, as well as some crossings for access to West Berlin's exclaves (see Steinstücken).

Four autobahns connected West Berlin to West Germany, including Berlin-Helmstedt autobahn, which entered East German territory between the towns of Helmstedt and Marienborn (Checkpoint Alpha), and which entered West Berlin at Dreilinden (Checkpoint Bravo for the Allied forces) in southwestern Berlin. Access to West Berlin was also possible by railway (four routes) and by boat for commercial shipping via canals and rivers.[7][80][93]

Non-German Westerners could cross the border at Friedrichstraße station in East Berlin and at Checkpoint Charlie. When the Wall was erected, Berlin's complex public transit networks, the S-Bahn and U-Bahn, were divided with it.[82] Some lines were cut in half; many stations were shut down. Three western lines traveled through brief sections of East Berlin territory, passing through eastern stations (called Geisterbahnhöfe, or ghost stations) without stopping. Both the eastern and western networks converged at Friedrichstraße, which became a major crossing point for those (mostly Westerners) with permission to cross.[93][94]
Crossing
Travel orders to go to Berlin as used by U.S. forces in the 1980s

West Germans and citizens of other Western countries could generally visit East Germany, often after applying for a visa[95] at an East German embassy several weeks in advance. Visas for day trips restricted to East Berlin were issued without previous application in a simplified procedure at the border crossing. However, East German authorities could refuse entry permits without stating a reason. In the 1980s, visitors from the western part of the city who wanted to visit the eastern part had to exchange at least DM 25 into East German currency at the poor exchange rate of 1:1. It was forbidden to export East German currency from the East, but money not spent could be left at the border for possible future visits. Tourists crossing from the west had to also pay for a visa, which cost DM 5; West Berliners did not have to pay this fee.[94]

West Berliners initially could not visit East Berlin or East Germany at all—all crossing points were closed to them between 26 August 1961 and 17 December 1963. In 1963, negotiations between East and West resulted in a limited possibility for visits during the Christmas season that year (Passierscheinregelung). Similar, very limited arrangements were made in 1964, 1965 and 1966.[94]

In 1971, with the Four Power Agreement on Berlin, agreements were reached that allowed West Berliners to apply for visas to enter East Berlin and East Germany regularly, comparable to the regulations already in force for West Germans. However, East German authorities could still refuse entry permits.[94]
East Berlin "death strip" of the Berlin Wall, as seen from the Axel Springer AG Building, 1984

East Berliners and East Germans could not, at first, travel to West Berlin or West Germany at all. This regulation remained in force essentially until the fall of the Wall, but over the years several exceptions to these rules were introduced, the most significant being:

    Elderly pensioners could travel to the West starting in 1964[96]
    Visits of relatives for important family matters
    People who had to travel to the West for professional reasons (for example, artists, truck drivers, musicians, writers, etc.)

For each of these exceptions, GDR citizens had to apply for individual approval, which was never guaranteed. In addition, even if travel was approved, GDR travellers could exchange only a very small number of East German Marks into Deutsche Marks (DM), thus limiting the financial resources available for them to travel to the West. This led to the West German practice of granting a small amount of DM annually (Begrüßungsgeld, or welcome money) to GDR citizens visiting West Germany and West Berlin to help alleviate this situation.[94]

Citizens of other East European countries were in general subject to the same prohibition of visiting Western countries as East Germans, though the applicable exception (if any) varied from country to country.[94]
Allied Military Personal Crossing

Allied military personnel and civilian officials of the Allied forces could enter and exit East Berlin without submitting to East German passport controls, purchasing a visa or being required to exchange money. Likewise, Soviet military patrols could enter and exit West Berlin. This was a requirement of the post-war Four Powers Agreements. A particular area of concern for the Western Allies involved official dealings with East German authorities when crossing the border, since Allied policy did not recognize the authority of the GDR to regulate Allied military traffic to and from West Berlin, as well as the Allied presence within Greater Berlin, including entry into, exit from, and presence within East Berlin.[94]

The Allies held that only the Soviet Union, and not the GDR, had the authority to regulate Allied personnel in such cases. For this reason, elaborate procedures were established to prevent inadvertent recognition of East German authority when engaged in travel through the GDR and when in East Berlin. Special rules applied to travel by Western Allied military personnel assigned to the military liaison missions accredited to the commander of Soviet forces in East Germany, located in Potsdam.[94]

Allied personnel were restricted by policy when travelling by land to the following routes:

Transit between West Germany and West Berlin

    Road: The Helmstedt–Berlin autobahn (A2) (Checkpoints Alpha and Bravo respectively). Soviet military personnel manned these checkpoints and processed Allied personnel for travel between the two points. The Western Allies considered Ziesar, specifically Exit 76 from Autobahn 2, the halfway point of the transit route between West Berlin and "mainland" West Germany. Road patrols offering breakdown services and assistance with DDR and Soviet authorities to Allied travelers were provided by Americans based in Berlin east of Ziesar and by the British detachment at Helmstedt west of it.

    Rail: Western Allied military personnel and civilian officials of the Allied forces were forbidden to use commercial train service between West Germany and West Berlin, because of GDR passport and customs controls when using them. Instead, the Allied forces operated a series of official (duty) trains that traveled between their respective duty stations in West Germany and West Berlin. When transiting the GDR, the trains would follow the route between Helmstedt and Griebnitzsee, just outside West Berlin. In addition to persons traveling on official business, authorized personnel could also use the duty trains for personal travel on a space-available basis. The trains traveled only at night, and as with transit by car, Soviet military personnel handled the processing of duty train travelers.[94] (See History of the Berlin S-Bahn.)

Entry into and exit from East Berlin

    Checkpoint Charlie (as a pedestrian or riding in a vehicle)

As with military personnel, special procedures applied to travel by diplomatic personnel of the Western Allies accredited to their respective embassies in the GDR. This was intended to prevent inadvertent recognition of East German authority when crossing between East and West Berlin, which could jeopardize the overall Allied position governing the freedom of movement by Allied forces personnel within all Berlin.

Ordinary citizens of the Western Allied powers, not formally affiliated with the Allied forces, were authorized to use all designated transit routes through East Germany to and from West Berlin. Regarding travel to East Berlin, such persons could also use the Friedrichstraße train station to enter and exit the city, in addition to Checkpoint Charlie. In these instances, such travelers, unlike Allied personnel, had to submit to East German border controls.[94]
Defection attempts
Further information: List of deaths at the Berlin Wall

During the years of the Wall, around 5,000 people successfully defected to West Berlin. The number of people who died trying to cross the Wall, or as a result of the Wall's existence, has been disputed. The most vocal claims by Alexandra Hildebrandt, director of the Checkpoint Charlie Museum and widow of the museum's founder, estimated the death toll to be well above 200.[11][12] A historic research group at the Centre for Contemporary History (ZZF) in Potsdam has confirmed at least 140 deaths.[12] Prior official figures listed 98 as being killed.
NVA soldier Conrad Schumann defecting to West Berlin during the Wall's early days in 1961
October 7, 1961. Four-year-old Michael Finder of East Germany is tossed by his father into a net held by residents across the border in West Berlin. The father, Willy Finder, prepares to make the jump himself.

The East German government issued shooting orders (Schießbefehl) to border guards dealing with defectors, though such orders are not the same as "shoot to kill" orders. GDR officials denied issuing the latter. In an October 1973 order later discovered by researchers, guards were instructed that people attempting to cross the Wall were criminals and needed to be shot:

    Do not hesitate to use your firearm, not even when the border is breached in the company of women and children, which is a tactic the traitors have often used.[97]

Early successful escapes involved people jumping the initial barbed wire or leaping out of apartment windows along the line, but these ended as the Wall was fortified. East German authorities no longer permitted apartments near the Wall to be occupied, and any building near the Wall had its windows boarded and later bricked up. On 15 August 1961, Conrad Schumann was the first East German border guard to escape by jumping the barbed wire to West Berlin.[98]

On 22 August 1961, Ida Siekmann was the first casualty at the Berlin Wall: she died after she jumped out of her third floor apartment at 48 Bernauer Strasse.[99] The first person to be shot and killed while trying to cross to West Berlin was Günter Litfin, a twenty-four-year-old tailor. He attempted to swim across the Spree to West Berlin on 24 August 1961, the same day that East German police had received shoot-to-kill orders to prevent anyone from escaping.[100]

Another dramatic escape was carried out in April 1963 by Wolfgang Engels, a 19-year-old civilian employee of the Nationale Volksarmee (NVA). Engels stole a Soviet armored personnel carrier from a base where he was deployed and drove it right into the Wall. He was fired at and seriously wounded by border guards. But a West German policeman intervened, firing his weapon at the East German border guards. The policeman removed Engels from the vehicle, which had become entangled in the barbed wire.[101]
Memorial to the Victims of the Wall, with graffiti, 1982

East Germans successfully defected by a variety of methods: digging long tunnels under the Wall, waiting for favorable winds and taking a hot air balloon, sliding along aerial wires, flying ultralights and, in one instance, simply driving a sports car at full speed through the basic, initial fortifications. When a metal beam was placed at checkpoints to prevent this kind of defection, up to four people (two in the front seats and possibly two in the boot) drove under the bar in a sports car that had been modified to allow the roof and windscreen to come away when it made contact with the beam. They lay flat and kept driving forward. The East Germans then built zig-zagging roads at checkpoints. The sewer system predated the Wall, and some people escaped through the sewers,[102] in a number of cases with assistance from the Unternehmen Reisebüro.[103] In September 1962, 29 people escaped through a tunnel to the west.[104] At least 70 tunnels were dug under the wall; only 19 were successful in allowing fugitives—about 400 persons—to escape. The East German authorities eventually used seismographic and acoustic equipment to detect the practice.[105][106] In 1962, they planned an attempt to use explosives to destroy one tunnel, but this was not carried out as it was apparently sabotaged by a member of the Stasi.[106]

An airborne escape was made by Thomas Krüger, who landed a Zlin Z 42M light aircraft of the Gesellschaft für Sport und Technik, an East German youth military training organization, at RAF Gatow. His aircraft, registration DDR-WOH, was dismantled and returned to the East Germans by road, complete with humorous slogans painted on it by airmen of the Royal Air Force, such as "Wish you were here" and "Come back soon".[107]

If an escapee was wounded in a crossing attempt and lay on the death strip, no matter how close they were to the Western wall, Westerners could not intervene for fear of triggering engaging fire from the 'Grepos', the East Berlin border guards. The guards often let fugitives bleed to death in the middle of this ground, as in the most notorious failed attempt, that of Peter Fechter (aged 18) at a point near Zimmerstrasse in East Berlin. He was shot and bled to death, in full view of the Western media, on 17 August 1962.[108] Fechter's death created negative publicity worldwide that led the leaders of East Berlin to place more restrictions on shooting in public places and provide medical care for possible "would-be escapers".[109] The last person to be shot and killed while trying to cross the border was Chris Gueffroy on 6 February 1989, while the final person to die in an escape attempt was Winfried Freudenberg who was killed when his homemade natural gas-filled balloon crashed on 8 March 1989.

The Wall gave rise to a widespread sense of desperation and oppression in East Berlin, as expressed in the private thoughts of one resident, who confided to her diary "Our lives have lost their spirit ... we can do nothing to stop them."[110]
Concerts by Western artists and growing anti-Wall sentiment
David Bowie, 1987

On 6 June 1987, David Bowie, who earlier for several years lived and recorded in West Berlin, played a concert close to the Wall. This was attended by thousands of Eastern concertgoers across the Wall,[111] followed by violent rioting in East Berlin. According to Tobias Ruther, these protests in East Berlin were the first in the sequence of riots that led to those of November 1989.[112][113] Although other factors were probably more influential in the fall of the Wall,[111] upon his death in 2016, the German Foreign Office tweeted "Good-bye, David Bowie. You are now among #Heroes. Thank you for helping to bring down the #wall."[114]
Bruce Springsteen, 1988

On 19 July 1988, 16 months before the Wall came down, Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band, played Rocking the Wall, a live concert in East Berlin, which was attended by 300,000 in person and broadcast on television. Springsteen spoke to the crowd in German, saying: "I'm not here for or against any government. I've come to play rock 'n' roll for you in the hope that one day all the barriers will be torn down".[115] East Germany and its FDJ youth organization were worried they were losing an entire generation. They hoped that by letting Springsteen in, they could improve their sentiment among East Germans. However, this strategy of "one step backwards, two steps forwards" backfired, and the concert only made East Germans hungrier for more of the freedoms that Springsteen epitomized.
David Hasselhoff, 1989

On 31 December 1989, American TV actor and pop-music singer David Hasselhoff was the headlining performer for the Freedom Tour Live concert, which was attended by over 500,000 people on both sides of the Wall. The live concert footage was directed by music-video director Thomas Mignone and aired on broadcast television station Zweites Deutsches Fernsehen ZDF throughout Europe. During shooting, film crew personnel pulled people up from both sides to stand and celebrate on top of the wall. Hasselhoff sang his number-one-hit song "Looking for Freedom" on a platform at the end of a twenty-meter steel crane that swung above and over the Wall adjacent to the Brandenburg Gate.[116] A small museum was created in 2008 to celebrate Hasselhoff in the basement of the Circus Hostel.[117]
Comments by politicians
Main articles: Ich bin ein Berliner and Tear down this wall!
Ich bin ein Berliner (I am a Berliner) speech
Duration: 9 minutes and 2 seconds.9:02Subtitles available.CC
Speech from the Rathaus Schöneberg by John F. Kennedy, 26 June 1963. Duration 9:01.
Ich bin ein Berliner ("I am a Berliner") speech (audio)
Duration: 9 minutes and 22 seconds.9:22
Audio-only version (Duration 9:22)
Problems playing these files? See media help.
Duration: 26 minutes and 21 seconds.26:21Subtitles available.CC
Complete speech by Ronald Reagan at the Brandenburg Gate, 12 June 1987. "Tear down this wall" passage begins at 11:10 into this video.

On 26 June 1963, 22 months after the erection of the Berlin Wall, U.S. President John F. Kennedy visited West Berlin. Speaking from a platform erected on the steps of Rathaus Schöneberg for an audience of 450,000 and straying from the prepared script,[118] he declared in his Ich bin ein Berliner speech the support of the United States for West Germany and the people of West Berlin in particular:

    Two thousand years ago, the proudest boast was civis Romanus sum ["I am a Roman citizen"]. Today, in the world of freedom, the proudest boast is "Ich bin ein Berliner!"... All free men, wherever they may live, are citizens of Berlin, and therefore, as a free man, I take pride in the words "Ich bin ein Berliner!"

The message was aimed as much at the Soviets as it was at Berliners and was a clear statement of U.S. policy in the wake of the construction of the Berlin Wall. The speech is considered one of Kennedy's best, both a significant moment in the Cold War and a high point of the New Frontier. It was a great morale boost for West Berliners, who lived in an exclave deep inside East Germany and feared a possible East German occupation.[119]

British prime minister Margaret Thatcher commented in 1982:

    Every stone bears witness to the moral bankruptcy of the society it encloses.[120]

In a speech at the Brandenburg Gate commemorating the 750th anniversary of Berlin[121] on 12 June 1987, U.S. President Ronald Reagan challenged Mikhail Gorbachev, then the General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, to tear down the Wall as a symbol of increasing freedom in the Eastern Bloc:

    We welcome change and openness; for we believe that freedom and security go together, that the advance of human liberty can only strengthen the cause of world peace. There is one sign the Soviets can make that would be unmistakable, that would advance dramatically the cause of freedom and peace. General Secretary Gorbachev, if you seek peace, if you seek prosperity for the Soviet Union and eastern Europe, if you seek liberalization, come here to this gate. Mr. Gorbachev, open this gate. Mr. Gorbachev, tear down this Wall![122]

In January 1989, GDR leader Erich Honecker predicted that the Wall would stand for 50 or 100 more years[123] if the conditions that had caused its construction did not change.
Fall
Main article: Fall of the Berlin Wall

Due to the increasing economic problems in the Eastern Bloc and the failure of the USSR to intervene in relation to the individual communist states, the brackets of the Eastern Bloc slowly began to loosen from the end of the 1980s. One example is the fall of the communist government in neighboring Poland's 1989 Polish parliamentary election. Also in June 1989, the Hungarian government began dismantling the electrified fence along its border with Austria (with Western TV crews present) although the border was still very closely guarded and escape was almost impossible.

The opening of a border gate between Austria and Hungary at the Pan-European Picnic on 19 August 1989, which was based on an idea by Otto von Habsburg to test the reaction of Mikhail Gorbachev,[124] then triggered a peaceful chain reaction, the end of which saw the end of the GDR and the Eastern Bloc. Because of the non-reaction of the USSR and the GDR to the mass exodus, the media-informed Eastern Europeans perceived the decreasing power of their governments, and more and more East Germans were now trying to flee via Hungary. In a comment to the Daily Mirror regarding the Pan-European Picnic, Erich Honecker showed his people his own inaction: "Habsburg distributed leaflets far into Poland, on which the East German holidaymakers were invited to a picnic. When they came to the picnic, they were given gifts, food and Deutsche Mark, and then they were persuaded to come to the West."[14][15][125] Then, in September, more than 13,000 East German tourists escaped through Hungary to Austria.[126] This set up a chain of events. The Hungarians prevented many more East Germans from crossing the border and returned them to Budapest. These East Germans flooded the West German embassy and refused to return to East Germany.[127]
East German border guard at Berlin Wall, July 1988

The East German government responded by disallowing further travel to Hungary but allowed those already there to return to East Germany.[128] This triggered similar events in neighboring Czechoslovakia. This time, however, the East German authorities allowed people to leave, provided that they did so by train through East Germany. This was followed by mass demonstrations within East Germany itself. Protests spread throughout East Germany in September 1989. Initially, protesters were mostly people wanting to leave to the West, chanting "Wir wollen raus!" ("We want out!"). Then protestors began to chant "Wir bleiben hier!" ("We are staying here!"). This was the start of what East Germans generally call the "Peaceful Revolution" of late 1989.[129] The protest demonstrations grew considerably by early November. The movement neared its height on 4 November, when half a million people gathered to demand political change at the Alexanderplatz demonstration, in East Berlin's large public square and transportation hub.[130] On 9 October 1989, the police and army units were given permission to use force against those assembled, but this did not deter the church service and march from taking place, which gathered 70,000 people.[131]

The longtime leader of East Germany, Erich Honecker, resigned on 18 October 1989 and was replaced by Egon Krenz that day.

The wave of refugees leaving East Germany for the West kept increasing. By early November refugees were finding their way to Hungary via Czechoslovakia, or via the West German embassy in Prague. This was tolerated by the new Krenz government, because of long-standing agreements with the communist Czechoslovak government, allowing free travel across their common border. However, this movement of people grew so large it caused difficulties for both countries. To ease the difficulties, the politburo led by Krenz decided on 9 November to allow refugees to exit directly through crossing points between East Germany and West Germany, including between East and West Berlin. Later the same day, the ministerial administration modified the proposal to include private, round-trip, and travel. The new regulations were to take effect the next day.[132]
East German military parade in Karl-Marx-Allee, East Berlin in August 1986, celebrating the "25th anniversary of the Anti-Fascist Protection Wall", the official name of the Berlin Wall

Günter Schabowski, the party boss in East Berlin and the spokesman for the SED Politburo, had the task of announcing the new regulations. However, he had not been involved in the discussions about the new regulations and had not been fully updated.[133] Shortly before a press conference on 9 November, he was handed a note announcing the changes, but given no further instructions on how to handle the information. These regulations had only been completed a few hours earlier and were to take effect the following day, so as to allow time to inform the border guards. But this starting time delay was not communicated to Schabowski.[56][page needed] At the end of the press conference, Schabowski read out loud the note he had been given. A reporter, ANSA's Riccardo Ehrman,[134] asked when the regulations would take effect. After a few seconds' hesitation, Schabowski replied, "As far as I know, it takes effect immediately, without delay".[56][page needed] After further questions from journalists, he confirmed that the regulations included the border crossings through the Wall into West Berlin, which he had not mentioned until then.[135] He repeated that it was immediate in an interview with American journalist Tom Brokaw.[136]

Excerpts from Schabowski's press conference were the lead story on West Germany's two main news programs that night—at 7:17 p.m. on ZDF's heute and at 8 p.m. on ARD's Tagesschau. As ARD and ZDF had broadcast to nearly all of East Germany since the late 1950s and had become accepted by the East German authorities, the news was broadcast there as well simultaneously. Later that night, on ARD's Tagesthemen, anchorman Hanns Joachim Friedrichs proclaimed, "This 9 November is a historic day. The GDR has announced that, starting immediately, its borders are open to everyone. The gates in the Wall stand open wide."[56][page needed][133]

After hearing the broadcast, East Germans began gathering at the Wall, at the six checkpoints between East and West Berlin, demanding that border guards immediately open the gates.[133] The surprised and overwhelmed guards made many hectic telephone calls to their superiors about the problem. At first, they were ordered to find the "more aggressive" people gathered at the gates and stamp their passports with a special stamp that barred them from returning to East Germany—in effect, revoking their citizenship. However, this still left thousands of people demanding to be let through "as Schabowski said we can".[56][page needed] It soon became clear that no one among the East German authorities would take personal responsibility for issuing orders to use lethal force, so the vastly outnumbered soldiers had no way to hold back the huge crowd of East German citizens. Finally, at 10:45 p.m. on 9 November, Harald Jäger, the commander of the Bornholmer Straße border crossing yielded, allowing the guards to open the checkpoints and allowing people through with little or no identity checking.[137] As the Ossis swarmed through, they were greeted by Wessis waiting with flowers and champagne amid wild rejoicing. Soon afterward, a crowd of West Berliners jumped on top of the Wall, and were soon joined by East German youngsters.[138] The evening of 9 November 1989 is known as the night the Wall came down.[139]

Another border crossing to the south may have been opened earlier. An account by Heinz Schäfer indicates that he also acted independently and ordered the opening of the gate at Waltersdorf-Rudow a couple of hours earlier.[140] This may explain reports of East Berliners appearing in West Berlin earlier than the opening of the Bornholmer Straße border crossing.[141]

Thirty years after the fall of the Berlin Wall, The Guardian collected short stories from 9 November 1989 by five German writers who reflect on the day. In this, Kathrin Schmidt remembers comically: "I downed almost an entire bottle of schnapps".[142]
Legacy

    Remains of the Wall adjacent to the Topography of Terror, August 2007
    Remains of the Wall adjacent to the Topography of Terror, August 2007
    A memorial of over a thousand crosses and a segment of the Wall for those who died trying to cross. The memorial stood for ten months from 2004 to 2005.
    A memorial of over a thousand crosses and a segment of the Wall for those who died trying to cross. The memorial stood for ten months from 2004 to 2005.
    A "BERLINER MAUER 1961–1989" plaque near Checkpoint Charlie signifying where the Wall stood
    A plaque near Checkpoint Charlie signifying where the Wall stood
    Display of two sections of the Wall and a "You are leaving" sign at Fort Gordon, Georgia, US
    Display of two sections of the Wall and a "You are leaving" sign at Fort Gordon, Georgia, US
    The Berlin Wall from the East Berlin side, 1967
    The Berlin Wall from the East Berlin side, 1967
    A sign reading "Until we see each other again in the capital of the GDR"
    A sign reading "Until we see each other again in the capital of the GDR"
    Czech hedgehog anti-tank obstacles and the Wall
    Czech hedgehog anti-tank obstacles and the Wall
    An exhibition dedicated to the 25th anniversary to the Berlin Wall destruction was located at Potsdamer Platz Arkaden.
    An exhibition dedicated to the 25th anniversary to the Berlin Wall destruction was located at Potsdamer Platz Arkaden.
    A hole in the Berlin wall, 2019
    A hole in the Berlin wall, 2019

Remaining stretch of the Wall near Ostbahnhof in Friedrichshain called East Side Gallery, August 2006

Little is left of the Wall at its original site, which was destroyed almost in its entirety. Three long sections are still standing: an 80-metre-long (260 ft) piece of the first (westernmost) wall at the Topography of Terror, site of the former Gestapo headquarters, halfway between Checkpoint Charlie and Potsdamer Platz; a longer section of the second (easternmost) wall along the Spree River near the Oberbaumbrücke, nicknamed East Side Gallery; and a third section that is partly reconstructed, in the north at Bernauer Straße, which was turned into a memorial in 1998. Other isolated fragments, lampposts, other elements, and a few watchtowers also remain in various parts of the city.

    The former leadership in the Schlesischen Busch in the vicinity of the Puschkinallee—the listed, twelve-meter high watchtower stands in a piece of the wall strip, which has been turned into a park, near the Lohmühleninsel.[143]
    The former "Kieler Eck" (Kiel Corner) on Kieler Strasse in Mitte, close to the Berlin-Spandau Schifffahrtskanal—the tower is protected as a historic monument and now surrounded on three sides by new buildings. It houses a memorial site named after the Wallopfer Günter Litfin, who was shot at Humboldthafen in August 1961. The memorial site, which is run by the initiative of his brother Jürgen Liftin, can be viewed after registration.
    The former management office at Nieder Neuendorf, in the district of Hennigsdorf of the same name—here is the permanent exhibition on the history of the border installations between the two German states.
    The former management station at Bergfelde, today the district of Hohen Neuendorf—The tower is located in an already reforested area of the border strip and is used together with surrounding terrain as a nature protection tower by the Deutschen Waldjugend.
    The only one of the much slimmer observation towers (BT-11) in the Erna-Berger-Strasse also in Mitte—however, was moved by a few meters for construction work and is no longer in the original location; There is an exhibition about the wall in the area of the Potsdamer Platz in planning.

Line indicating where the inner part of the wall once stood on Leipziger Platz, just off Potsdamer Platz, in 2015

Nothing still accurately represents the Wall's original appearance better than a very short stretch at Bernauer Straße associated with the Berlin Wall Documentation Center.[144] Other remnants are badly damaged by souvenir seekers. Fragments of the Wall were taken, and some were sold around the world. Appearing both with and without certificates of authenticity, these fragments are now a staple on the online auction service eBay as well as German souvenir shops. Today, the eastern side is covered in graffiti that did not exist while the Wall was guarded by the armed soldiers of East Germany. Previously, graffiti appeared only on the western side. Along some tourist areas of the city centre, the city government has marked the location of the former Wall by a row of cobblestones in the street. In most places only the "first" wall is marked, except near Potsdamer Platz where the stretch of both walls is marked, giving visitors an impression of the dimension of the barrier system.

After the fall of the Berlin Wall, there were initiatives that they want to preserve the death strip walkways and redevelop them into a hiking and cycling area, known as Berliner Mauerweg. It is part of the initiative by the Berlin Senate since 11 October 2001.[145]
Cultural differences
Remains of the Berlin wall, 2016
Segment of the Berlin wall in the Sanctuary of Fátima, Portugal

For many years after reunification, people in Germany talked about cultural differences between East and West Germans (colloquially Ossis and Wessis), sometimes described as Mauer im Kopf (The wall in the head). A September 2004 poll found that 25 percent of West Germans and 12 percent of East Germans wished that East and West should be separated again by a "Wall".[146] A poll taken in October 2009 on the occasion of the 20th anniversary of the fall of the Wall indicated, however, that only about a tenth of the population was still unhappy with the unification (8 percent in the East; 12 percent in the West). Although differences are still perceived between East and West, Germans make similar distinctions between North and South.[147]

A 2009 poll conducted by Russia's VTsIOM, found that more than half of all Russians do not know who built the Berlin Wall. Ten percent of people surveyed thought Berlin residents built it themselves. Six percent said Western powers built it and four percent thought it was a "bilateral initiative" of the Soviet Union and the West. Fifty-eight percent said they did not know who built it, with just 24 percent correctly naming the Soviet Union and its then-communist ally East Germany.[148]
Wall segments around the world
Main article: List of Berlin Wall segments

Not all segments of the Wall were ground up as the Wall was being torn down. Many segments have been given to various institutions around the world. They can be found, for instance, in presidential and historical museums, lobbies of hotels and corporations, at universities and government buildings, and in public spaces in different countries of the world.[149]
50th anniversary commemoration

On 13 August 2011, Germany marked the 50th anniversary of East Germany beginning the erection of the Berlin Wall. Chancellor Angela Merkel joined with President Christian Wulff and Berlin Mayor Klaus Wowereit at the Bernauer Straße memorial park to remember lives and liberty. Speeches extolled freedom and a minute of silence at noon honored those who died trying to flee to the West. "It is our shared responsibility to keep the memory alive and to pass it on to the coming generations as a reminder to stand up for freedom and democracy to ensure that such injustice may never happen again." entreated Mayor Wowereit. "It has been shown once again: Freedom is invincible at the end. No wall can permanently withstand the desire for freedom", proclaimed President Wulff.[150][151][152][153]
Polling

A small minority still support the wall or even support rebuilding the wall back up. In 2008 a poll found that 11% of participants from the former West Berlin and 12% from the former East Berlin said it would be better if the wall was still in place.[154]

A November 2009 poll found that 12% of Germans said the wall should be rebuilt. The poll also found that in the former West German states support was at 12% and in the former East German states it was 13%. A September 2009 poll found 15% of Germans supported a wall, while in the west it was 16% and in the east it was at 10%.[155][156]

A 2010 poll from Emnid for Bild, found that 24% of West Germans and 23% of East Germans wished for the wall still being in place.[157][158][159][160]

A 2011 poll from Forsa found 35% of Berliners thought the construction of the Wall was not so wrong with supporters of the Left Party at 74%.[161]

A 2019 poll from Berliner Zeitung on the 30th anniversary, found that 8% of Berliners supported the idea if the wall was still standing, The overwhelming majority of Berliners at 87% however supported the fall of the wall. The poll also found that 28% of the Alternative for Germany (AfD) and 16% of Free Democratic Party (FDP) supporters supported bringing back the wall.[162] A 2019 Yougov poll found that 13% of Germans wanted the wall back, in the West support was at 14% and in the East it was 13%.[163]
Related media
	
This article may contain irrelevant references to popular culture. Please help improve it by removing such content and adding citations to reliable, independent sources. (August 2020)
Documentaries
See also: Category:Films about the Berlin Wall

Documentary films specifically about the Berlin Wall include:

    The Tunnel (December 1962), an NBC News Special documentary film.
    The Road to the Wall (1962), a documentary film.
    Something to Do with the Wall (1991), a documentary about the fall of the Berlin Wall by Ross McElwee and Marilyn Levine, originally conceived as a commemoration of the 25th anniversary of its construction.[164]
    Rabbit à la Berlin (2009), a documentary film, directed by Bartek Konopka, told from the point of view of a group of wild rabbits that inhabited the zone between the two walls.
    The American Sector (2020), a documentary by Courtney Stephens and Pacho Velez that tracks down the wall segments located in the U.S.[165]

Feature films
See also: Category:Films about the Berlin Wall

Fictional films featuring the Berlin Wall have included:

    Escape from East Berlin (1962), American-West German film inspired by story of 29 East Germans that tunneled under the wall[166]
    The Spy Who Came in from the Cold (1965), a Cold War classic set on both sides of The Wall, from the eponymous book by John le Carré, directed by Martin Ritt.
    The Boy and the Ball and the Hole in the Wall (1965), Spanish-Mexican co-production.[167]
    Funeral in Berlin (1966), a spy movie starring Michael Caine, directed by Guy Hamilton.
    Casino Royale (1967), a film featuring a segment centred on a house apparently bisected by the Wall.
    The Wicked Dreams of Paula Schultz (1968), a Cold War spy farce about an Olympic athlete who defects, directed by George Marshall.
    Berlin Tunnel 21 (1981), a made-for-TV movie about a former American officer leading an attempt to build a tunnel underneath The Wall as a rescue route.
    Night Crossing (1982), a British-American drama film starring John Hurt, Jane Alexander, and Beau Bridges, based on the true story of the Strelzyk and Wetzel families, who on 16 September 1979, attempted to escape from East Germany to West Germany in a homemade hot air balloon, during the days of the Inner German border-era.
    The Innocent (1993), a film about the joint CIA/MI6 operation to build a tunnel under East Berlin in the 1950s, directed by John Schlesinger.
    Sonnenallee (1999), a German comedy film about life in East Berlin in the late 1970s, directed by Leander Haußmann.
    The Tunnel (2001), a dramatization of a collaborative tunnel under the Wall, filmed by Roland Suso Richter.
    Good Bye Lenin! (2003), film set during German unification that depicts the fall of the Wall through archive footage
    Open The Wall (2014), featuring a dramatized story of the East-German border guard who was the first to let East Berliners cross the border to West Berlin on 9 November 1989.
    Bridge of Spies (2015), featuring a dramatized subplot about Frederic Pryor, in which an American economics graduate student visits his German girlfriend in East Berlin just as the Berlin Wall is being built. He tries to bring her back into West Berlin but is stopped by Stasi agents and arrested as a spy.

Literature

Some novels specifically about the Berlin Wall include:

    John le Carré, The Spy Who Came in from the Cold (1963), classic Cold War spy fiction.
    Len Deighton, Berlin Game (1983), classic Cold War spy fiction
    T.H.E. Hill, The Day Before the Berlin Wall: Could We Have Stopped It? – An Alternate History of Cold War Espionage,[168] 2010 – based on a legend told in Berlin in the 1970s.
    John Marks' The Wall (1999)[169] in which an American spy defects to the East just hours before the Wall falls.
    Marcia Preston's West of the Wall (2007, published as Trudy's Promise in North America), in which the heroine, left behind in East Berlin, waits for news of her husband after he makes his escape over the Berlin Wall.[170]
    Peter Schneider's The Wall Jumper, (1984; German: Der Mauerspringer, 1982), the Wall plays a central role in this novel set in Berlin of the 1980s.

Music

Music related to the Berlin Wall includes:

    Stationary Traveller (1984), a concept album by Camel that takes the theme of families and friends split up by the building of the Berlin Wall.
    "West of the Wall", a 1962 top 40 hit by Toni Fisher, which tells the tale of two lovers separated by the newly built Berlin Wall.
    "Holidays in the Sun", a song by the English punk rock band Sex Pistols which prominently mentions the Wall, specifically singer Johnny Rotten's fantasy of digging a tunnel under it.
    David Bowie's "'Heroes'" (1977), inspired by the image of a couple kissing at the Berlin Wall (in reality, the couple was his producer Tony Visconti and backup singer Antonia Maaß). The song (which, along with the album of the same name, was recorded in Berlin), makes lyrical references to the kissing couple, and to the "Wall of Shame" ("the shame was on the other side"). Upon Bowie's death, the Federal Foreign Office paid homage to Bowie on Twitter:[171]see also above
    "Over de muur (nl)" (1984), a song by the Dutch pop band Klein Orkest (nl), about the differences between East and West Berlin during the period of the Berlin Wall.[172]
    "Chippin' Away" (1990),[173] a song by Tom Fedora, performed by Crosby, Stills & Nash on the Berlin Wall, which appeared on Graham Nash's solo album Innocent Eyes (1986).
    "Berliners", a song by Roy Harper from his 1990 album Once (lyrics include "They built a wall, boys, it stayed up for thirty years"). The song uses a BBC news broadcast describing the fall of the wall.
    "Hedwig and the Angry Inch," a rock opera whose genderqueer protagonist Hedwig Robinson was born in East Berlin and later, living in the United States, describes herself as "the new Berlin Wall" standing between "East and West, slavery and freedom, man and woman, top and bottom." As a result, she says, people are moved to "decorate" her with "blood, graffiti and spit."[174] (1998)
    The music video for Liza Fox's song "Free" (2013) contains video clips of the fall of the Berlin Wall.

Visual art

Artworks related to the Berlin Wall include:
The Day the Wall Came Down (1996) by Veryl Goodnight, a statue depicting horses leaping over actual pieces of the Berlin Wall

    In 1982, the West-German artist Elsner (de) created about 500 artworks along the former border strip around West Berlin as part of his work series Border Injuries. On one of his actions he tore down a large part of the Wall,[175] installed a prepared foil of 3x2m in it, and finished the painting there before the border soldiers on patrol could detect him. This performance was recorded on video.[176] His actions are well-documented both in newspapers from that time and in recent scientific publications.[177]
    The Day the Wall Came Down, 1996 and 1998 sculptures by Veryl Goodnight, which depict five horses leaping over actual pieces of the Berlin Wall.

Games

Video games related to the Berlin Wall include:

    The Berlin Wall (1991), a video game.
    Ostalgie: The Berlin Wall (2018), video game by Kremlingames, where the player, playing as the leader of the GDR from 1989 to 1991, can take down the Berlin Wall themselves or as a result of events in the game, or keep the wall intact as long as the country exists.[178]
    Call of Duty: Black Ops (2010), appears as a multiplayer level in the First Strike DLC.[179]
    Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War (2020), the Berlin Wall appears when the player crosses into East Berlin from a CIA safehouse.[180]

See also

    iconArchitecture portaliconCities portalflagEast Germany portalflagGermany portal

    Berlin Crisis of 1961 (October 1961)
    Chapel of Reconciliation
    Deborah Kennedy, American artist whose works were featured on the wall before its fall
    Dissolution of the Soviet Union (1991)
    East Germany balloon escape
    Green Line (Lebanon)
    Inner German border
    Israeli annexation of East Jerusalem
    Korean Demilitarized Zone
        Military Demarcation Line
    List of walls
    Operation Gold
    Peace lines
    Removal of Hungary's border fence with Austria
    The Wall – Live in Berlin (rock opera/concert, 21 July 1990)
    World Freedom Day (United States)

Notes

    There was no international consensus whether East Berlin was part of the GDR. The Soviet Union and the GDR considered it to be the GDR capital city, while the Western Bloc considered it as the separate Soviet occupation sector.[2]

References

"Untangling 5 myths about the Berlin Wall". Chicago Tribune. 31 October 2014. Archived from the original on 20 April 2019. Retrieved 1 November 2014.
Piotrowicz, Ryszard W.; Blay, Sam (1997). The unification of Germany in international and domestic law. Rodopi. p. 42. ISBN 90-5183-755-0. OCLC 36437948.
Video: Berlin, 1961/08/31. Universal Newsreel. 1961. Retrieved 20 February 2012.
Marck, Jack (October 2006). "Over the Wall: A Once-in-a-Lifetime Experience". American Heritage. Archived from the original on 29 August 2008.
"Berlin Wall". Encyclopaedia Britannica. 23 January 2024.
"Berlin Wall: Five things you might not know". The Telegraph. 12 August 2011. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 22 May 2017.
"Berlin Wall Fast Facts". CNN. 16 September 2013. Archived from the original on 13 November 2019. Retrieved 9 April 2019.
✂️ Numbers of East Germans Fleeing. Retrieved 29 May 2025 – via www.youtube.com.
"Freedom!". Time. 20 November 1989. Archived from the original on 21 November 2007. Retrieved 9 November 2009.
"Victims of the Wall". www.berlin.de. 19 August 2020. Archived from the original on 9 December 2021. Retrieved 9 December 2021.
"Forschungsprojekt "Die Todesopfer an der Berliner Mauer, 1961–1989": BILANZ (Stand: 7. August 2008) (in German)". Archived from the original on 29 September 2019. Retrieved 6 August 2011.
"Todesopfer an der Berliner Mauer" [Fatalities at the Berlin Wall] (in German). Chronik der Mauer. Archived from the original on 6 October 2019. Retrieved 26 January 2018.
Hilde Szabo: Die Berliner Mauer begann im Burgenland zu bröckeln (The Berlin Wall began to crumble in Burgenland – German), in Wiener Zeitung 16 August 1999; Otmar Lahodynsky: Paneuropäisches Picknick: Die Generalprobe für den Mauerfall (Pan-European picnic: the dress rehearsal for the fall of the Berlin Wall – German), in: Profil 9 August 2014.
Thomas Roser: DDR-Massenflucht: Ein Picknick hebt die Welt aus den Angeln (German – Mass exodus of the GDR: A picnic clears the world) in: Die Presse 16 August 2018.
Der 19. August 1989 war ein Test für Gorbatschows" (German – August 19, 1989 was a test for Gorbachev), in: FAZ 19 August 2009.
Miller 2000, pp. 4–5
Miller 2000, p. 16
Amos Yoder (1993). Communism in Transition: The End of the Soviet Empires. Taylor & Francis. p. 58. ISBN 978-0-8448-1738-5. Retrieved 1 January 2016.
Bob Reinalda (2009). Routledge History of International Organizations: From 1815 to the Present Day. Routledge. p. 369. ISBN 978-1-134-02405-6. Archived from the original on 1 January 2016. Retrieved 1 January 2016.
Laurien Crump (2015). The Warsaw Pact Reconsidered: International Relations in Eastern Europe, 1955–1969. Routledge. p. 17
Laurien Crump (2015). The Warsaw Pact Reconsidered: International Relations in Eastern Europe, 1955–1969. Routledge. p. 1.
Berman, Russell A. (1 October 2020). "Leaving Socialism Behind: A Lesson From Germany". Hoover Institution. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 27 March 2021.
Turner 1987, p. 20
Gaddis 2005, p. 33
Miller 2000, pp. 65–70
Turner 1987, p. 29
Fritsch-Bournazel, Renata, Confronting the German Question: Germans on the East-West Divide, Berg Publishers, 1990, ISBN 0-85496-684-6, p. 143
Gaddis 2005, p. 34
Miller 2000, pp. 180–181
Kenull, Torsten (2005). Die Geschichte der DDR in Ihren Gründzügen. Hary: GRIN Verlag für akademische Texte.
Wettig 2008, p. 179
In a congratulatory telegram, Stalin emphasized that, with the creation of East Germany, the "enslavement of European countries by the global imperialists was rendered impossible." (Wettig, Gerhard, Stalin and the Cold War in Europe, Rowman & Littlefield, 2008, ISBN 0-7425-5542-9, p. 179)
Kenull, Torsten (2005). Die Geschichte der DDR in Ihren Grundzügen. Harz: GRIN Verlag für akademische Texte. p. 8.
"Everything you need to know about the Berlin Wall". The Independent. 7 November 2014. Archived from the original on 28 January 2018. Retrieved 9 April 2019.
Thackeray 2004, p. 188
Bayerisches Staatsministerium für Arbeit und Sozialordnung, Familie und Frauen, Statistik Spätaussiedler Dezember 2007, p. 3 (in German)
Loescher 2001, p. 60
Loescher 2001, p. 68
Dale 2005, p. 17
Dowty 1989, p. 114
Dowty 1989, p. 116
Dowty 1989, p. 121
Harrison 2003, p. 240-fn
Harrison 2003, p. 98
Harrison 2003, p. 99
Paul Maddrell, Spying on Science: Western Intelligence in Divided Germany 1945–1961, p. 56. Oxford University Press, 2006
Dowty 1989, p. 122
"A Brief History of the Berlin Crisis of 1961" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.
Harrison 2003, p. 100
Volker Rolf Berghahn, Modern Germany: Society, Economy and Politics in the Twentieth Century, p. 227. Cambridge University Press, 1987
Pearson 1998, p. 75
Crozier 1999, pp. 170–171
Rottman, Gordon (2008). The Berlin Wall and the Intra-German Border 1961–1989. Oxford, UK: Osprey Publishing. p. 29. ISBN 978-184603-193-9.
Wiegrefe, Klaus (May 2009). "Wir lassen euch jetzt ein, zwei Wochen Zeit". Einestages. Spiegel Online (in German). Archived from the original on 9 February 2014.
"Transcript of the telephone call between Khrushchev and Ulbricht on August 1, 1961". Die Welt (in German). Welt.de. 30 May 2009. Archived from the original on 21 August 2011. Retrieved 6 August 2011.
Sebetsyen, Victor (2009). Revolution 1989: The Fall of the Soviet Empire. New York: Pantheon Books. ISBN 978-0-375-42532-5.
Kempe, Frederick (2011). Berlin 1961. Penguin Group. p. 247. ISBN 978-0-399-15729-5.
Kempe, Frederick (27 May 2011). "The worst day of JFK's life". Archived from the original on 30 May 2011.
"The Berlin Wall: A Secret History". www.historytoday.com. Archived from the original on 27 February 2019. Retrieved 9 April 2019.
"Exchanges of Territory". City of Berlin. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 23 January 2016.
"Exchanges of Territory: Lenné-Dreieck". City of Berlin. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 23 January 2016.
"Wall Goes Up in Berlin – Events of 1961 – Year in Review". UPI.com. 29 May 1998. Archived from the original on 26 July 2013. Retrieved 6 August 2011.
Keeling, Drew (2014), business-of-migration.com "Berlin Wall and Migration," Migration as a travel business Archived 25 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine
Daum 2008, pp. 27–28
Taylor, Frederick. The Berlin Wall: 13 August 1961 – 9 November 1989. Bloomsbury 2006
"Goethe-Institut – Topics – German History". 9 April 2008. Archived from the original on 9 April 2008. Retrieved 6 August 2011.
"Die Regierungen der Warschauer Vertragsstaaten wenden sich an die Volkskammer und an die Regierung der DDR mit dem Vorschlag, an der Westberliner Grenze eine solche Ordnung einzuführen, durch die der Wühltätigkeit gegen die Länder des sozialistischen Lagers zuverlässig der Weg verlegt und ringsum das ganze Gebiet West-Berlins eine verlässliche Bewachung gewährleistet wird." Die Welt: Berlin wird geteilt
"Neues Deutschland: Normales Leben in Berlin,14 August 1961" (in German). Zlb.de. Archived from the original on 18 July 2011. Retrieved 6 August 2011.
Sarotte, Mary Elise (2014). The Collapse: The Accidental Opening of the Berlin Wall. New York: Basic Books. p. 114. ISBN 978-0-465-06494-6.
"Berlin Crisis After Dividing Berlin, August 1961" (PDF). The National Security Archive at George Washington University in Washington, D.C. Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 September 2013. Retrieved 26 September 2013.
Matthew M. Aid & William Burr (25 September 2013). "'Disreputable if Not Outright Illegal': The National Security Agency versus Martin Luther King, Muhammad Ali, Art Buchwald, Frank Church, et al". The National Security Archive at the George Washington University in Washington, D.C. Archived from the original on 26 September 2013. Retrieved 26 September 2013.
Daum 2008, pp. 51–56
See also Hackworth, About Face
Evans, Ben (2014). Escaping The Bonds of Earth: The Fifties and the Sixties. Chichester, UK: Praxis Publishing. p. 38. ISBN 978-0-387-79093-0.
Goodman, Micah (1996) "After the Wall: The Legal Ramifications of the East German Border Guard Trials in Unified Germany," Cornell International Law Journal: Vol. 29: Iss. 3, Article 3. p. 728
Berliner Mauer (Stand 31. Juli 1989) Polizeipräsident von Berlin Archived 9 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine.
Bundeszentrale für politische Bildung: Ministerium für Staatssicherheit der DDR Archived 9 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine, siehe: Statistiken + "Grenzsicherung in Berlin" 1989.
"Hinterland wall on Bornholmer Straße – Witness to the events of 9 November 1989". Berlin.com. Retrieved 10 February 2020.
According to Hagen Koch, former Stasi-officer, in Geert Mak's documentary In Europa (TV program), episode 1961 – DDR Archived 9 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine, 25 January 2009
historian, Jennifer Rosenberg Jennifer Rosenberg is a; Fact-Checker, History; Topics, Freelance Writer Who Writes About 20th-Century History. "All About the 28-Year History, Rise and Fall of the Berlin Wall". ThoughtCo. Archived from the original on 16 February 2018. Retrieved 15 February 2018.
Burkhardt, Heiko. "Facts of Berlin Wall – History of Berlin Wall". Dailysoft.com. Archived from the original on 11 March 2021. Retrieved 9 November 2009.
P. Dousset; A. Souquet; S. Lelarge. "Berlin Wall". Archived from the original on 13 September 2006. Retrieved 9 November 2009.
Heiko Burkhardt. "Fourth Generation of Berlin Wall – History of Berlin Wall". Dailysoft.com. Archived from the original on 11 February 2021. Retrieved 9 November 2009.
Rise and Fall of the Berlin Wall. History Channel, 2009. DVD-ROM.
Popiolek. "The Berlin Wall : History of Berlin Wall : Facts". Die-berliner-mauer.de. Archived from the original on 12 October 2007. Retrieved 9 November 2009.
Rottman, Gordon L. (2012). The Berlin Wall and the Intra-German Border 1961–89. Bloomsbury Publishing. ISBN 9781782005087 – via Google Books.
DW News English (30 June 2009). "Walled in! – The inner German border". Archived from the original on 4 November 2020. Retrieved 13 November 2017 – via YouTube.
Rottman, Gordon L. (2012). The Berlin Wall and the Intra-German Border 1961–89. Bloomsbury Publishing. ISBN 9781782005087 – via Google Books.
"Foreign News Briefs". UPI. Archived from the original on 14 November 2017. Retrieved 14 November 2017.
"Graffiti in the death strip: the Berlin wall's first street artist tells his story". The Guardian. 3 April 2014. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 1 December 2017. Retrieved 31 October 2018 – via www.theguardian.com.
Oltermann, Philip (3 November 2014). "A line in history: the east German punks behind the Berlin Wall's most radical art stunt". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 24 September 2018. Retrieved 31 October 2018.
Harrison 2003, pp. 206–214
"How the Berlin Wall Worked". HowStuffWorks. 12 May 2008. Archived from the original on 16 February 2019. Retrieved 9 April 2019.
Wild, Chris (6 November 2014). "Before the Berlin Wall, people escaped through a wire fence". Mashable. Archived from the original on 16 February 2018. Retrieved 15 February 2018.
Willis, Jim (1946). Daily Life behind the Iron Curtain. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. ISBN 9780313397639. Retrieved 5 November 2014.
Chronik der Mauer staff. "Chronicle of the Berlin Wall: 9 September 1964". Chronik der Mauer. Federal Agency for Civic Education. Archived from the original on 1 December 2019. Retrieved 3 December 2019.
"E German 'licence to kill' found". BBC News. 12 August 2007. Archived from the original on 11 June 2009. Retrieved 12 August 2007. "A newly discovered order is the firmest evidence yet that the communist regime gave explicit shoot-to-kill orders, says Germany's director of Stasi files."
"Conrad Schumann, 56, Symbol of E. Berlin escapes"; North Sports Final Edition Associated Press. Chicago Tribune, Chicago, Ill.: 23 June 1998. p. 8
"Chronik der Mauer – Bau und Fall der Berliner Mauer | Opfer der Mauer". Chronik-der-mauer.de. Archived from the original on 14 March 2016. Retrieved 6 August 2011.
Kempe, Frederick (2011). Berlin 1961. Penguin Group (US). pp. 363–367. ISBN 978-0-399-15729-5.
Hertle, Hans-Hermann (2008). The Berlin Wall: Monument of the Cold War. Ch. Links Verlag, p. 72. ISBN 3-86153-463-0
"Escaping of the 5,000 from East Berlin". The Local Germany. 5 November 2014. Archived from the original on 16 February 2018. Retrieved 15 February 2018.
"Secret tunnels that brought freedom from Berlin's Wall". The Independent. 18 October 2009. Archived from the original on 16 February 2018. Retrieved 15 February 2018.
Merriman, Helena (2021). Tunnel 29. New York: Public Affairs. ISBN 9781541788831.
Crossland, David (4 November 2019). "Hatred of the Communist East that drove Berlin Wall tunneller". The Times. Archived from the original on 4 November 2019. Retrieved 3 November 2019.
"Meet the Berlin Wall tunnel digger saved by Stasi 'hero'". France 24. Agence France-Presse. 1 November 2019. Archived from the original on 8 November 2019. Retrieved 8 November 2019.
Vitaliev, V. (2008). "After all...the pupils of Houdini". Engineering & Technology (17509637), 3(18), 96.
"The Berlin Wall bricklayer whose death became instrumental in its destruction". The Independent. 9 November 2019. Archived from the original on 9 November 2019. Retrieved 9 November 2019.
Taylor, Frederick. The Berlin Wall: A World Divided 1961–1989, London: Harper Perennial, 2006.
Kempe, Frederick (2011). Berlin 1961. Penguin Group (US). p. 394. ISBN 978-0-399-15729-5.
Fisher, Max (11 January 2016). "David Bowie at the Berlin Wall: the incredible story of a concert and its role in history". Vox. Archived from the original on 13 January 2016. Retrieved 12 January 2016.
"Did Bowie bring down the Berlin Wall?". The Week. 15 December 2008. Archived from the original on 5 April 2022. Retrieved 11 January 2016.
"Germany: Thank you David Bowie for helping bring down the Berlin Wall". Business Insider Australia. 11 January 2016. Archived from the original on 24 February 2022. Retrieved 11 January 2016.
"Good-bye, David Bowie". German Foreign Office. 11 January 2016. Archived from the original on 8 March 2016. Retrieved 11 January 2016.
"Did Springsteen's 1988 Berlin gig rock the Wall?". The Local – Germany's News in English. 9 July 2013. Archived from the original on 28 September 2013. Retrieved 26 September 2013.
"How Mr. Hasselhoff Tore Down This Wall". NPR. National Public Radio. 9 November 2014. Archived from the original on 9 November 2014. Retrieved 9 November 2014.
"A Guide to the Weird and Wacky in Berlin". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 9 November 2019. Retrieved 1 March 2022.
Daum 2008, pp. 140–144
Daum 2008, pp. 136–156, 223–226
Mrs. Thatcher Visits the Berlin Wall Archived 13 November 2017 at the Wayback Machine, The New York Times, 30 October 1982
"Reagan's 'tear down this wall' speech turns 20". USA Today. 12 June 2007. Archived from the original on 14 March 2012. Retrieved 19 February 2008.
"Remarks at the Brandenberg Gate". Ronald Reagan Presidential Foundation. Archived from the original on 22 June 2008. Retrieved 9 February 2008.
"Berlin Wall anniversary: key dates in the history of Germany's Wall". The Telegraph. 9 November 2009. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 10 March 2020.
Miklós Németh in Interview, Austrian TV – ORF "Report", 25 June 2019.
Otmar Lahodynsky: Paneuropäisches Picknick: Die Generalprobe für den Mauerfall (Pan-European picnic: the dress rehearsal for the fall of the Berlin Wall – German), in: Profil 9 August 2014
Meyer, Michael (13 September 2009). "The picnic that brought down the Berlin Wall". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 15 July 2012. Retrieved 14 June 2010.
"Sie wird noch in 50 Jahren stehen" (in German). dpa. 22 May 2009. Archived from the original on 27 September 2011. Retrieved 10 March 2020.
Mary Elise Sarotte, Collapse: The Accidental Opening of the Berlin Wall, New York: Basic Books, 2014
"20 Jahre Mauerfall" (in German). Kulturprojekte Berlin GmbH. 2009. Archived from the original on 3 April 2009. Retrieved 9 April 2009.
Henslin, 07
Crutchley, Peter (9 October 2015). "How prayers helped end the Cold War". BBC. Archived from the original on 2 February 2019. Retrieved 2 February 2019.
Schäfer, Hermann (2015). Deutsche Geschichte in 100 Objekten. München, Berlin, Zürich: Piper. p. 570. ISBN 978-3-492057028.
Sarotte, Mary Elise (1 November 2009). "How it went down: The little accident that toppled history". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 5 April 2023. Retrieved 2 November 2009.
Kirchner, Stephanie (19 April 2009). "Berlin Wall: Was the Fall Engineered by the GDR?". Time. Archived from the original on 22 April 2009. Retrieved 18 June 2019.
Walker, Marcus (21 October 2009). "Did Brinkmannship Fell Berlin's Wall? Brinkmann Says It Did". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 16 July 2018. Retrieved 3 August 2017.
"Brokaw reports from the Berlin Wall". NBC NEWS. 9 November 1989. Archived from the original on 16 August 2017. Retrieved 18 June 2019.
"The Guard Who Opened the Berlin Wall: 'I Gave my People the Order – Raise the Barrier'". Spiegel Online. 9 November 2014. Archived from the original on 13 October 2014. Retrieved 14 October 2014.
Sarotte, Mary Elise (2014). The Collapse: The Accidental Opening of the Berlin Wall. New York: Basic Books. pp. 146–147. ISBN 978-0-465-06494-6.
"1989: The night the Wall came down". 9 November 1989. Archived from the original on 12 July 2020. Retrieved 10 August 2019 – via news.bbc.co.uk.
McElroy, Damien (7 November 2009). "East Germans may have arrived in West Berlin hours before previously thought". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 7 November 2014.
Protzman, Ferdinand (10 November 1989). "Clamor in the East; East Berliners Explore Land Long Forbidden". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 22 October 2021. Retrieved 22 October 2021.
Erpenbeck, Jenny; Brussig, Thomas; Schmidt, Kathrin; Wagner, David; Rennefanz, Sabine (9 November 2019). "Watching the fall of the Berlin Wall: 'I downed almost an entire bottle of schnapps'". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 9 November 2019. Retrieved 9 November 2019.
"Flutgraben e.V." kunstfabrik.org. Archived from the original on 11 January 2016. Retrieved 25 June 2017.
"Berlin Wall Memorial". Berlin Wall Foundation. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 23 January 2016.
"Berlin Wall Trail". Berlin.de. State of Berlin. 28 August 2015. Archived from the original on 25 June 2022. Retrieved 25 June 2022. "Construction of the Berliner Mauerweg (Berlin Wall Trail) began in 2002 and was completed in 2006, in line with a resolution passed by the Berlin House of Representatives on 11 October 2001. […] The state-owned Grün Berlin Park und Garten GmbH was charged with carrying out the project under the overall supervision of the Senate Department for Urban Development."
"One in 5 Germans wants Berlin Wall rebuilt". NBC News. Reuters. 8 September 2004. Archived from the original on 18 March 2013. Retrieved 23 February 2006.
ZDF "Wochenjournal" (5 November 2009). "Große Zustimmung zur Wiedervereinigung". ZDF. Archived from the original on 14 December 2009. Retrieved 6 November 2006.
Solovyov, Dmitry (5 November 2009). "Who built Berlin Wall? Most Russians don't know". Uk.reuters.com. Archived from the original on 19 January 2010. Retrieved 6 August 2011.
"Where in the World Is the Berlin Wall?". Newsweek. 11 November 2014. Archived from the original on 4 November 2017. Retrieved 1 November 2017.
"Germany marks 50th anniversary of Berlin Wall". London: UK Telegraph. 13 August 2011. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 13 August 2011.
"Germany Marks Construction of the Berlin Wall". Associated Press. 13 August 2011. Archived from the original on 14 August 2011. Retrieved 13 August 2011.
"Reflecting on the Berlin Wall, 50 Years After Its Construction". History.com. 11 August 2011. Archived from the original on 25 January 2013. Retrieved 13 August 2011.
"50 Years Berlin Wall 1961–1989 [video clips]". German World. 13 August 2011. Archived from the original on 12 November 2011. Retrieved 13 August 2011.
"Bring Back the Wall – DW – 07/27/2008". Deutsche Welle.
"Umfrage: Jeder achte Deutsche will die Mauer zurück". Der Spiegel. 8 November 2009.
"One in seven Germans want Berlin Wall back?". Reuters. 17 September 2009.
"Survey finds support for return of Berlin Wall". Hindustan Times. 15 March 2010.
"Umfrage: Jeder Vierte wünscht sich die Mauer zurück – Welt".
"Umfrage-Schock Ost-West: Jeder vierte Deutsche wünscht sich die Mauer zurück". 14 March 2010.
"Umfrage: Mauer noch nicht aus Köpfen verschwunden". 15 March 2010.
"35 Prozent der Berliner finden den Bau der Mauer gar nicht so falsch". 3 August 2011.
"Exklusive Forsa-Umfrage: Das denken die Berliner 30 Jahre später über den Mauerfall". 4 November 2019.
"Umfrage unter Deutschen: 13 Prozent wollen die Mauer zurück".
McElwee, Ross. "Something to do with the Wall". RossMcElwee.com. Archived from the original on 19 May 2018. Retrieved 29 May 2018.
Glenn, Ezra Haber (15 February 2021). "The American Sector – Meditating on Displaced Fragments of History". Archived from the original on 15 February 2021. Retrieved 17 February 2021.
Hoberman, J. (26 June 2015). "'Escape From East Berlin,' Reissued Five Decades Later". The New York Times. The New York Times. Archived from the original on 1 January 2022. Retrieved 18 December 2020.
Gélin, Daniel; Varela, Yolanda; Arco, Nino Del; Block, Karin (15 July 1965), The Boy and the Ball and the Hole in the Wall, archived from the original on 19 October 2017, retrieved 12 May 2017
"The Day Before The Berlin Wall: Could We have Stopped It?". Voicesunderberlin.com. Archived from the original on 16 November 2012. Retrieved 26 March 2013.
"Cold War Reheated". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 8 February 2018. Retrieved 26 March 2013.
Administrator. "View the author's website". Archived from the original on 15 February 2015. Retrieved 1 November 2014.
Kollmeyer, Barbara (11 January 2016). "David Bowie death triggers tributes from Iggy Pop, Madonna—even the Vatican and the German government". MarketWatch. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017. Retrieved 23 January 2016.
"Klein Orkest biography". Sweetslyrics.com. Archived from the original on 24 September 2011. Retrieved 6 August 2011.
Crosby, Stills & Nash 1990 – Chippin' Away on YouTube
"Hedwig and the Angry Inch – Tear Me Down". genius.com. Archived from the original on 22 October 2021. Retrieved 20 July 2021.[unreliable source?]
"Die Mauer als Muse". The Wall fell on July 18th 1982. Lars von Törne in Der Tagesspiegel. 13 March 2007. Archived from the original on 19 January 2012. Retrieved 13 March 2007.
"ELSNER's Border Injuries". artworks & video documentation. galerie son. Archived from the original on 12 November 2011. Retrieved 8 October 2011.
"ELSNER". press archive. galerie son. Archived from the original on 12 November 2011. Retrieved 8 October 2011.
Bähr, Sebastian. "Die DDR überlebt (neues deutschland)". www.neues-deutschland.de (in German). Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 17 February 2021.
Madrigal, Hector (23 August 2011). "Berlin Wall". IGN.com. IGN. Retrieved 6 July 2025.

    Peel, Jeremy (19 November 2020). "What Call of Duty gets right and wrong about East Berlin". pcgamer.net. PC Gamer. Retrieved 6 June 2025.

Sources

    Childs, David (2001). The Fall of the GDR: Germany's Road To Unity, Longman, Pearsoned.co.uk. ISBN 978-0-582-31569-3
    Childs, David (1986) [1983]. The GDR: Moscow's German Ally, London: George Allen & Unwin, ISBN 978-0-04-354029-9.
    Childs, David (2001). The Fall of the GDR, Longman. ISBN 0-582-31569-7 Amazon.co.uk Archived 19 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine
    Childs, David (2000). The Two Red Flags: European Social Democracy & Soviet Communism Since 1945, Routledge. [ISBN missing]
    Childs, David (1991). Germany in the Twentieth Century, (From pre-1918 to the restoration of German unity), Batsford, Third edition. ISBN 0-7134-6795-9
    Childs, David (1987). East Germany to the 1990s Can It Resist Glasnost?, The Economist Intelligence Unit. ISBN 978-0-85058-245-1. WorldCat.org Archived 3 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine
    Crozier, Brian (1999). The Rise and Fall of the Soviet Empire. Forum. ISBN 978-0-7615-2057-3.
    Dale, Gareth (2005). Popular Protest in East Germany, 1945–1989: Judgements on the Street. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-7146-5408-9.
    Daum, Andreas (2008). Kennedy in Berlin. New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-85824-3.
    Dowty, Alan (1989). Closed Borders: The Contemporary Assault on Freedom of Movement. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-04498-0.
    Gaddis, John Lewis (2005). The Cold War: A New History. Penguin Press. ISBN 978-1-59420-062-5.
    Harrison, Hope Millard (2003). Driving the Soviets Up the Wall: Soviet-East German Relations, 1953–1961. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-09678-0.
    Loescher, Gil (2001). The UNHCR and World Politics: A Perilous Path. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-829716-1.
    Miller, Roger Gene (2000). To Save a City: The Berlin Airlift, 1948–1949. Texas A&M University Press. ISBN 978-0-89096-967-0.
    Pearson, Raymond (1998). The Rise and Fall of the Soviet Empire. Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-312-17407-1.
    Thackeray, Frank W. (2004). Events that changed Germany. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-313-32814-5.
    Turner, Henry Ashby (1987). The Two Germanies Since 1945: East and West. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-03865-1.
    Wettig, Gerhard (2008). Stalin and the Cold War in Europe. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-7425-5542-6.
    Luftbildatlas. Entlang der Berliner Mauer. Karten, Pläne und Fotos. Hans Wolfgang Hoffmann / Philipp Meuser (eds.) Berlin 2009. ISBN 978-3-938666-84-5
    Sarotte, Mary Elise (2014). Collapse: The Accidental Opening of the Berlin Wall, New York: Basic Books, [ISBN missing]
    Sarotte, Mary Elise (2014) [1989]. The Struggle to Create Post-Cold War Europe (Second Edition) Princeton: Princeton University Press, [ISBN missing]

External links
Wikiquote has quotations related to Berlin Wall.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Berlin Wall.
Look up Berlin Wall in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

    Official website
    "Berlin Wall Memorial". Berlin Wall Foundation.
    "Chronicle of the Berlin Wall". Deutschlandradio.
    "The Berlin Wall: a Multimedia Story". Rundfunk Berlin-Brandenburg (RRB).
    Berlin Wall collected news and commentary at The New York Times
    Berlin Wall collected news and commentary at The Guardian
    Works about Berlin Wall in libraries (WorldCat catalog)
    "Berlin Wall (newsreel archives)" (Adobe Flash video)). Multimedia. British Pathe.
    Berlin Wall on OpenStreetMap (zoomable and scrollable)
    Other resources:
        Berlin Wall image group on Flickr
        Berlin Wall Online, historical chronicle
        Nail, Norbert. "Meine Mauer – Deutsche Bilder aus der Vergangenheit" [My Wall – German Pictures from the past] (in German). University of Marburg.

    vte

Berlin Wall
	

	
photo

	

	


	


	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

    vte

Borders of Germany
	

	

    vte

Cold War

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	
	

	

	

	

	
	

	


	

	


	

	

    vte

Revolutions of 1989

	


	

	


	


	


	


	


	

	

	

	


	

	

	

    vte

Eastern Bloc

	

	

	


	

	

	

    vte

Damage, destruction and looting of art and cultural heritage

	
	

	

	

	

Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
	

	

	

Categories:

    Berlin WallBorder barriers1961 establishments in East Germany1961 establishments in West Germany1961 in military history1961 in politics20th century in BerlinAllied occupation of GermanyBuildings and structures completed in 1961Buildings and structures demolished in 1989Buildings and structures demolished in 1990Demolished buildings and structures in GermanyEastern BlocFormer buildings and structures in GermanyInner German borderSeparation barriersCity walls in Germany

    This page was last edited on 27 November 2025, at 17:49 (UTC).
    Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

    Privacy policy
    About Wikipedia
    Disclaimers
    Contact Wikipedia
    Legal & safety contacts
    Code of Conduct
    Developers
    Statistics
    Cookie statement
    Mobile view

    Wikimedia Foundation
    Powered by MediaWiki

